ERLANG AND THE LET IT CRASH PHILOSOPHY

WHAT IT IS

Erlang is a programming language built at Ericsson in the
1980s for telephone switches - systems that are not allowed to
go down, ever, because someone might be dialing an ambulance.
Out of that constraint fell a design philosophy now called "let
it crash": instead of defensively catching every possible
error at the point it happens, you let a piece of code die
outright when something goes wrong, and let a SEPARATE piece of
code, watching from outside, notice the death and restart it
into a known-good state.

This sounds reckless until you notice the trick: crashing is
not the failure mode, crashing is the RECOVERY mechanism. The
system is designed so death is cheap, isolated, and always
followed by resurrection. The failure mode you are actually
avoiding is a process staggering on in a corrupted, half-broken
state, silently producing wrong answers because someone wrote a
catch-all exception handler that papered over a problem nobody
understood.

WHY IT MATTERS

Most languages treat error handling as: enumerate every way this
specific line can fail, wrap it in a try/catch, decide locally
what to do about it. That works until the failure is something
you did not anticipate - a null you did not check for, a
timeout you did not expect, a hardware fault. At that point the
defensive code has one of two outcomes: it does not catch the
error and the whole process falls over anyway, or it catches
something too broad and swallows a bug into silent corruption.

Erlang inverts the responsibility. The code that does the work
is written for the HAPPY PATH ONLY - no defensive checks
littering every function, because "handle every possible error
locally" does not scale to a system nobody fully understands the
failure modes of, which is every sufficiently large system.
Instead, failure handling is centralized into SUPERVISORS,
whose only job is watching workers and deciding what to do when
one dies: restart it, restart its siblings too, or escalate
further up. This is not "give up on error handling" - it is
moving error handling out of business logic and into
architecture, where it can be reasoned about uniformly instead
of ad hoc at every call site.

This is why Erlang systems have a famous reputation for uptime -
the canonical example is the Ericsson AXD301 switch, reported at
nine nines of availability, about 31 milliseconds of downtime a
year, not because the code never had bugs, but because
individual bugs were contained to individual lightweight
processes and cleaned up automatically before they could spread.

THE CORE MECHANISM

Three pieces make this work, and they only work together.

1) LIGHTWEIGHT, ISOLATED PROCESSES. Erlang's "process" is not
an OS process - it is a green thread managed by the Erlang
runtime (the BEAM VM), with its own private memory heap, no
shared mutable state with any other process, and a mailbox for
receiving messages. Spawning one costs a few hundred bytes and
microseconds. A real Erlang system routinely runs hundreds of
thousands of these concurrently. Because nothing is shared, one
process crashing cannot corrupt another process's memory - the
blast radius of a crash is exactly one process, by construction,
not by discipline.

=====
    Pid = spawn(fun() -> worker_loop() end),
    Pid ! {do_work, SomeData},
    receive
        {result, R} -> R
    end.
=====

2) LINKS AND MONITORS. Processes can link to each other. A
link is a bidirectional promise: if either linked process dies
abnormally, the other gets an EXIT signal. By default that
signal propagates the crash - your process dies too, unless it
is set to trap_exit, in which case the EXIT signal arrives as an
ordinary message instead of killing it. This is the raw
primitive that failure detection is built from - not polling,
not health checks, a push notification the moment something
dies.

3) SUPERVISORS AND SUPERVISION TREES. A supervisor is a process
whose entire job is starting child processes, trapping their
exits, and deciding what to do when one dies, according to a
declared strategy:

=====
    %% one_for_one: only the crashed
    %% child gets restarted
    %%
    %% one_for_all: if one child dies,
    %% kill and restart all of them
    %% (use when children depend on
    %% each other's state)
    %%
    %% rest_for_one: restart the
    %% crashed child and everything
    %% started after it
    init([]) ->
        SupFlags = #{strategy => one_for_one,
                     intensity => 5,
                     period => 10},
        ChildSpecs = [worker_spec(w1),
                      worker_spec(w2)],
        {ok, {SupFlags, ChildSpecs}}.
=====

Supervisors are themselves ordinary processes, so they can be
supervised by other supervisors - you build a TREE, workers as
leaves, supervisors as internal nodes, all the way up to one
root. A crash climbs the tree only as far as it needs to: a
worker's bug restarts the worker; if a whole subsystem's
invariants are broken, it restarts the whole subsystem; the top
of the tree is the last line of defense. The "intensity/period"
setting is the circuit breaker - if a child crashes too many
times too fast, the supervisor gives up and crashes itself,
escalating the problem upward instead of restart-looping
forever on a bug that restarting cannot fix.

WHAT PEOPLE GET WRONG

1) "Let it crash means don't handle errors." Backwards. It
means stop handling errors you cannot meaningfully recover from
AT THE POINT they occur, and instead handle the one error you
CAN always meaningfully act on - "this thing died" - at a level
with enough context and enough distance to actually fix it,
namely: restart it clean. You still validate input, still
return proper error values for expected, recoverable
conditions. Let it crash is about UNEXPECTED failures, not all
failures.

2) "Restarting the process fixes the bug." It does not, and is
not trying to. It fixes the SYMPTOM - a process now stuck in a
bad state - by discarding that state and starting fresh from
known-good initial conditions, which is usually enough because
most production failures are transient (a flaky network call, a
timeout, a race condition) rather than deterministic. If the bug
is deterministic, the process will crash again immediately on
the same input, the supervisor's intensity limit will trip, and
the failure escalates loudly instead of looping silently - which
is a feature, it turns a latent bug into a visible, boundaried
one instead of hiding it.

3) "This is just try/catch with extra steps." The unit of
failure is the whole thing here, not a line. A try/catch
recovers control flow within one function while the surrounding
state may already be inconsistent. A supervised process crash
discards the ENTIRE process, memory and all, so there is no
possibility of limping on with half-updated state - either it is
running with fully-initialized state or it does not exist yet.
That is a stronger guarantee than any catch block gives you,
because the catch block is still running inside the potentially
corrupted process.

4) "This only works because Erlang is exotic." The isolation
and the crash-boundary IS the exotic part, and it is exactly why
copying "let it crash" into a language with shared mutable state
and OS threads does not reproduce the benefit - if a crashing
thread can still leave shared memory half-mutated, restarting it
does not undo the damage. The philosophy requires the isolation
guarantee underneath it; you cannot bolt it onto an
architecture that shares state by default.

WHERE IT CONNECTS

The Actor Model, formalized by Carl Hewitt in the 1970s, is the
theoretical ancestor - independent units of computation that
only interact by sending messages, never by touching each
other's state directly. Erlang processes are actors; Akka on
the JVM and Elixir (which compiles to the same BEAM VM) both
borrow the same model explicitly.

Elixir is worth knowing about specifically: it is a newer
language built on top of the same BEAM VM and OTP (Open
Telecom Platform, the supervisor/worker framework this section
described), with more modern syntax and tooling, aimed at
bringing the same crash-isolation guarantees to web backends -
the Phoenix framework's LiveView feature leans hard on
per-connection process isolation for exactly this reason.

Circuit breakers, as a pattern in other ecosystems (Hystrix,
resilience4j), are a partial convergent reinvention of the
supervisor's intensity limit - stop retrying a failing
dependency after N failures, fail fast instead of cascading. It
solves a narrower problem (calls to one flaky dependency) with
similar instincts (bound the damage, escalate instead of
hiding).

Kubernetes pod restarts are the same idea one layer up the
stack, at the granularity of a whole container instead of a
lightweight process - a crashed pod gets replaced with a fresh
one from a known-good image, on the same bet that most failures
are transient and a clean restart is cheaper than debugging live.
The stack differs, the bet is identical.
